How should I start learning Python?
Neha Ahuja
Neha Ahuja, studied Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Engineering at Savitribai Phule Pune University
Updated Sep 23, 2019 · Upvoted by Kratu Nandan, Programmer at Software and Applications (2000-present) and Arvind Patil, M.Tech Computer Science & Python, REVA University (2019)
Rather than giving you a boring step by step process of learning Python, I would share my personal journey about how I started learning Python.

Here is my personal learning experience:

What motivated me to start learn Python ?

I fell in love with Python after reading a bunch of answers on Quora about how people were doing wonderful things with Python.

Some were writing scripts to automate their Whats app messages.

Some wrote a script to download their favourite songs,

while some built a system to receive cricket score updates on their phones.

All of this seemed very excited to me and I finally decided that I would love to learn Python.

How I started learning Python ?

I started learning Python from The Complete Python Masterclass: Learn Python From Scratch as it was the recommended course for beginners.

I found the course to be really interesting yet simple for beginners like me.

However, if you are a professional programmer then I would recommend you to learn from the official docs : 3.7.2 Documentation

How much time it took to learn ?

Topic: Python basics, control structures, functions.

Time : - 1 Week.

Learning experience:

Learning Python basics is a piece of cake, it is extremely simple to get up and running with Python. Basics like variables, operators and control structures are extremely easy to learn as opposed to other languages like Java.

Topic: OOP & Regular Expressions

Time: 1 Week.

Learning Experience:

This section was a bit tough as I didn’t had a clear understanding of OOP principles. I had used OOP in Java but still was not clear about the concept but eventually with some practice I was able to understand OOP in Python, the self keyword and the init method.

If you are a beginner then I would recommend you to focus on this section as it is widely used while making complex applications.

You might not understand a lot of things at first, but give things time to sink in and it will make sense.

Topic: Tkinter

Time: 1 Week

Learning experience:

This was the most exciting as I finally learned how to build desktop GUI applications using Python. Learned about the Tkinter library which allowed us to build interactive GUI with Python. It felt as if everything I have learned till now started making sense. When I was finally complete with this section, I was able to build my very own calculator.

Here is a screenshot of what I built:


Topic:Data Analysis

Time: 1 Week

Learning experience:

Learned about the Numpy and Pandas library which are extensively used to perform data analysis with Python. If you aspire to be a data analyst/ data scientist I say you focus on learning the basics well. I also learned how to read data from an excel/ CSV file and visualise the same data on a chart. In the process, I also learned about Jupyter notebooks which is an excellent IDE for data visualisation with Python.

Here is a screenshot of me plotting some graphs:



Topic: Django

Time: 2 Weeks

Learning experience:

This was by far the most difficult topics I had ever learned. I had no previous experience learning anything related to server side web development and hence it took me a while to understand terminologies like authentication, URL routing, API and models.

I had initially given up on this section as it felt very complex but I took my time and worked my way through it with patience. I took notes on pen and paper and made sure that I understand every line of code even before I use it.

Eventually the efforts paid off and I finally started to understand what Django really is and how it works.

It took me 2 weeks to get done with the Django basics and a lot more practice to finally complete a Django project on my own.

I built my own todo app and a simple book store site using Django and a little bit of Bootstrap.

Here is a screenshot of the bookstore I built:



Topic: Flask & Web Crawler

Time: 2 Weeks.

Flask was a piece of cake after learning Django as Flask is just a micro framework.

I didn’t personally dabble much with Flask as I liked and preferred Django over Flask.

Building a web crawler was interesting as well, I built a crawler which was used by search engines back in the early days to crawl web pages, find links and store those links in a file.

Topic: Automation with selenium

Time: 1 Week.

After learning almost everything about Python selenium felt pretty easy.

Selenium is originally used for testing purposes but it turns out that you can automate various tasks with it. I learned how to build a Facebook auto poster with selenium.

It took me around 9–10 weeks to complete and I was happy with the process and eventually learned a lot about how Python works.

Note that I was dedicating 2–3 hours every day for learning.

Final conclusion:

It was a great experience learning Python and I now feel a lot more confident as a programmer. The main source of confidence was being able to build something of my own, however small it may be.

Although my learning process might seem easy but there was a lot of struggle and moments of frustration in between.

Here are a few of my tips if you want to start learning Python:

Have patience, if you are a beginner it will take time to let things sink in.
Aim at building small tools/projects, don’t just learn the syntax and jump to a new programming language.
Frustration and pain is a part of learning process, embrace it instead of avoiding it.
Errors/ issues are expected, don’t let that discourage you from learning.
Be consistent, if you are not consistent in learning it might take a lot more time and effort.
Happy learning !